COURSE SYLLABUS 
IST 407/707 Data Analytics 

1 

Instructor:  Josh Introne 
Office:  Hinds 236 
Email: jeintron@syr.edu 
Office Hours: By appointment 
______________________________________________________________________  

Prerequisite: IST 387/687. Exceptions maybe given to students who have acquired skills 
equivalent to what is taught in IST 387/687 

Audience: Undergraduate (407) & Graduate Students (707) 

Description: Introduction to data analytics techniques, familiarity with particular real- 
world applications, challenges involved in these applications, and future directions of the 
field. Hands-on experience with open-source software packages. 

Additional Course Description: 
This course will introduce popular data analytics methods for extracting knowledge 
from data. The principles and theories of data analytics methods will be discussed and 
will be related to the issues in applying data analytics to problems. Students will also 
acquire hands-on experience using state-of-the-art software to develop data analytics 
solutions to scientific and business problems. The focus of this course is in 
understanding of data and how to formulate data analytics tasks in order to solve 
problems using the data. 

The topics of the course will include the key tasks of data analytics, including data 
preparation, concept description, association rule analytics, classification, clustering, 
evaluation and analysis. Through the exploration of the concepts and techniques of data 
analytics and practical exercises, students will develop skills that can be applied to 
business, science or other organizational problems. 

The format of the class meetings will be a combined lecture and lab format, with 
lectures and class discussions to cover material and lab time to investigate small 
examples for the topic of the week. There will be weekly readings based on the 
textbook and on other materials, which will be posted on-line. 

Credits: 3 

Learning Objectives: 
After taking this course, the students will be able to: 

•  Document, analyze, and translate data analytics needs into technical designs 

and solutions. 

•  Apply data analytics concepts, algorithms, and evaluation methods to real-

world problems. 

•  Employ data storytelling and dive into the data, find useful patterns, and 

articulate what patterns have been found, how they are found, and why they are 
valuable and trustworthy. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COURSE SYLLABUS 
IST 407/707 Data 
Analytics 

4 

Bibliography/ Texts / Supplies – Optional: 

•  Pang-Ning Tan, Michael Steinbach, and Vipin Kumar (2005) Introduction to Data 

Analytics. (Free sample chapters available at authors’ website http://www- 
users.cs.umn.edu/~kumar/dmbook/index.php) 

•  Brett Lantz (2015) Machine Learning with R (second edition). 

Note to students: Given the diversified background of data science students, one 
textbook might not fit everyone. If you like rigorous algorithm presentation, I would 
recommend Mitchell's classic book on Machine Learning. If you like more lay-person 
explanation of machine learning, see if you like Lantz's book better. 
The current required textbook is a balance between the two views. I will put a copy of 
this book to the Bird Library reserve room. You can check it out and read for up to two 
hours every time. 

Tips for success in this class: Curiosity, critical thinking, math, and programming. 
•  Curiosity: Curious about the data, pay attention to the data details. Don't treat a data 
set as a blackbox. Don't treat an algorithm as a blackbox. Try see through them. 

•  Critical thinking: Data analytics is essentially research. You will learn and 

practice methods to discover patterns, and also evaluate whether and why the 
discovered patterns are true and useful. 

•  Math: You will need some math knowledge, such as algebra and probability, to 

understand how the data analytics algorithms work. 

Software 

•  R and Weka 

Note to students: We will mainly use R but keep Weka as a backup tool for students 
who do not have enough R skills. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Typical Course Schedule: 

COURSE SYLLABUS 
IST 407/707 Data 
Analytics 

Week 

Topic 

1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 

9 

10 
11 
12 

Introduction to Data Analytics 
Data Exploration 
Association Rules 
Clustering 
Classification: decision tree 
Classification: model evaluation 
Classification: naïve Bayes 
Classification algorithm: kNN, SVMs, random 
forest 
Artificial Neural Networks 

Text Mining and NLP 
Individual Portfolio Working Session 
Individual Portfolio Presentation 

13  Group Project: Working Session  
14  Group Project: Final Presentation 

Two days after the presentation 

Textbook 
Readings 
Ch.1 
Ch. 2-3 
Ch. 6.1-6.3 
Ch. 8.1-8.3 
Ch. 4.1-4.3 
Ch. 4.4-4.6 
Ch. 5.3 
Ch. 5.2, 5.5 

5 

Submission 
items 
HW1 
HW2 
HW3 
HW4 
  HW5 

HW6 
HW7 

HW8 

HW9 

Portfolio 
Report Due 

Group Project 
Report Due 

Requirements: 
Your final grade is determined by your performance on the items in the table below. An 
overview of each item is provided in the remainder of this section. 

Assessment Item 
Individual Portfolio 
Homework assignments 
Group Project  
Total 

Weight % 
30 
50 
20 
100 

• 

Individual Project Portfolio: The objective of the Individual Portfolio to 
research the concepts introduced in class each week, and to report on how 
they apply in the real world.   

•  Homework assignments: Assignments must be professionally prepared and 
submitted electronically to the LMS. All assignments should be submitted in 
Word files named as “HW_Num_Lastname_Firstname.doc(x)”, e.g. 
“HW_1_Smith_John.doc”. No PDF please. 

•  Group Project: The objective of the project is to work as a team to apply 

concepts taught in this class to solve a data analytics problem.  

Grading: 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COURSE SYLLABUS 
IST 407/707 Data 
Analytics 

6 

For this class, an "A" would mean the student has the capability to independently solve 
a simple data analytics task. Below is a common formula for number-to-letter grade  
conversion. 

Grade 

Points 

A 
A- 

93-100 
90-92 

Grade 
B+ 
B 
B- 

Points 
87-89 
83-86 
80-82 

Grade 
C+ 
C 
C- 

Points 
77-79 
73-76 
70-72 

Grades of D and D- may not be assigned to graduate students. 

Grade 
F 

Points 
0-69 

Course Specific Policies on attendance, late work, make up work, examinations if 
outside normal class time, etc.: 

•  Registration: Students must register prior to the first class or may be restricted 
from registering. If you are registered but not present at the first class, you run 
the risk of being administratively deregistered from this course so that your seat 
can be given to a student on the wait list. 

•  Late Policy for Assignments: To ensure fast return, all assignments should be 

submitted on time. One-hour grace period is given to accommodate any incidents 
around deadline. Late policy will be enforced starting from the second hour. You 
are free to discuss the assignments with your classmates, but you must write up 
the report all by yourself. Plagiarism cases will be reported to the university. 
•  Communications: This course will use Blackboard as the main communication 
platforms for class exercises and notifications. Students are required to check 
their Blackboard accounts on a regular basis. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COURSE SYLLABUS 
IST 407/707 Data 
Analytics 

7 

Educational Use of Student Work 

I intend to use academic work that you complete this semester in subsequent semesters 
for educational purposes. Before using your work for that purpose, I will either get your 
written permission or render the work anonymous by removing all personal identification. 

University Attendance Policy 
Attendance  in  classes  is expected  in all  courses  at  Syracuse University.  Students are expected  to 
arrive  on  campus  in  time  to  attend  the  first  meeting  of  all  classes  for  which  they  are  registered.  
Students who do not attend classes starting with the first scheduled meeting may be academically 
withdrawn as not making progress toward degree by failure to attend. Instructors set course-specific 
policies for absences from scheduled class meetings in their syllabi.  

It is a federal requirement that students who do not attend or cease to attend a class to be reported 
at the time of determination by the faculty. Faculty should use “ESPR” and “MSPR” in Orange 
Success to alert the Office of the Registrar and the Office of Financial Aid. A grade of NA is posted to 
any student for whom the Never Attended flag is raised in Orange SUccess. More information 
regarding Orange SUccess can be found here, at: http://orangesuccess.syr.edu/getting-started-2/  
Students should also review the University’s religious observance policy and make the required 
arrangements at the beginning of each semester 

Syracuse University Policies:  
Syracuse University has a variety of other policies designed to guarantee that students live and 
study in a community respectful of their needs and those of fellow students. Some of the most 
important of these concerns:  

Diversity and Disability (ensuring that students are aware of their rights and responsibilities in a 
diverse, inclusive, accessible, bias-free campus community) can be found here, at 
https://www.syracuse.edu/life/accessibilitydiversity/ 

Religious Observances Notification and Policy (steps to follow to request accommodations for the 
observance of religious holidays) can be found here, at: 
http://supolicies.syr.edu/studs/religious_observance.htm 

Orange SUccess (tools to access a variety of SU resources, including ways to communicate with 
advisors and faculty members) can be found here, at:  
http://orangesuccess.syr.edu/getting-started-2/ 

Disability-Related Accommodations: 

Syracuse University values diversity and inclusion; we are committed to a climate of mutual respect 
and full participation. There may be aspects of the instruction or design of this course that result in 
barriers to your inclusion and full participation in this course. I invite any student to meet with me to 
discuss  strategies  and/or  accommodations  (academic  adjustments)  that  may  be  essential  to  your 
success and to collaborate with the Office of Disability Services (ODS) in this process. 

If you would like to discuss disability-accommodations or register with ODS, please visit their website 
at http://disabilityservices.syr.edu./ Please call (315) 443-4498 or email disabilityservices@syr.edu 
for more detailed information.  

ODS is responsible for coordinating disability-related academic accommodations and will work with 
the student to develop an access plan. Since academic accommodations may require early planning 
and generally are not provided retroactively, please contact ODS as soon as possible to begin this 
process. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COURSE SYLLABUS 
IST 407/707 Data 
Analytics 

8 

Academic Integrity Policy: 
Syracuse University’s Academic Integrity Policy reflects the high value that we, as a university 
community, place on honesty in academic work. The policy defines our expectations for academic 
honesty and holds students accountable for the integrity of all work they submit. Students should 
understand that it is their responsibility to learn about course-specific expectations, as well as about 
university-wide academic integrity expectations. The policy governs appropriate citation and use of 
sources, the integrity of work submitted in exams and assignments, and the veracity of signatures on 
attendance sheets and other verification of participation in class activities. The policy also prohibits 
students from submitting the same work in more than one class without receiving written 
authorization in advance from both instructors. Under the policy, students found in violation are 
subject to grade sanctions determined by the course instructor and non-grade sanctions determined 
by the School or College where the course is offered as described in the Violation and Sanction 
Classification Rubric. SU students are required to read an online summary of the University’s 
academic integrity expectations and provide an electronic signature agreeing to abide by them twice 
a year during pre-term check-in on MySlice. 

Course evaluations:   

There will be an end of course evaluation for you to complete this term. This evaluation will be 
conducted online and is entirely anonymous. You will receive an official notice in your email account 
with the evaluation website link and your passcode. Please take the time and fill out this evaluation 
as your feedback and support of this assessment effort is very much appreciated.  The school 
carefully reviews ratings and comments that you submit, and these factor into decisions about 
course, program and instructor development. 

Use of Blackboard: 
This course involves the use of Syracuse University’s Blackboard system as an online tool. The 
environment is composed of a number of elements that will help you be successful in both your 
current coursework and your lifelong learning opportunities. To access Blackboard, 
[http://blackboard.syr.edu] use your Syracuse University NetID & Password.  This specific course will 
appear in your course list. 

To search for answers to your Blackboard questions, visit the Answers self-help knowledge [ 
https://answers.syr.edu/display/blackboard01/Blackboard ].  If you have problems logging in or need 
assistance with Blackboard, contact the ITS Service Center at: help@syr.edu or 315.443.2677.  The 
Syracuse University Blackboard support team will assist you. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
