COURSE SYLLABUS 
IST 736 Text Mining 

1 

  Course Lead: Professor Bei Yu (byu@syr.edu) 
  Section Instructor: See 2SU LMS Section 
  Note: Students should contact section instructor for questions 

Prerequisite: IST 687: Introduction to Data Science. The purpose of setting up this 
prerequisite is to ensure that incoming students have basic programming and 
algorithmic thinking skills. Exceptions may be given to  students who have acquired 
equivalent skills. 

Audience: Graduate students. 

Description: Introduces concepts and methods for knowledge discovery from large 
amounts of text data and the application of text mining techniques for business 
intelligence, digital humanities, and social behavior analysis. 

Additional Course Description:  The main goal of this course is to increase student 
awareness of the power of large amounts of text data and computational methods to 
find  patterns in large text corpora. This course is designed as a general introductory-
level  course for all students who are interested in text mining. Programming skill is 
preferred  but not required in this class.  This course will introduce the concepts and 
methods of  text mining technologies rooted from machine learning, natural language 
processing,  and statistics. This course will also showcase the applications of text 
mining  technologies in (1) information organization and access, (2) business 
intelligence, (3)  social behavior analysis, and (4) digital humanities. 

What is the difference between IST 565 Data Mining and IST 736 Text Mining? 

A number of students have asked the question, “What is the main difference between 
the  two courses: data mining and text mining?”  The two classes share the theoretical 
foundation in machine learning. Therefore, the fundamental concepts in machine 
learning, such as classification and clustering, are covered in both classes. However, 
these two classes differ in the following aspects: 

●  Content wise: The data mining class focuses on structured data, meaning the 

data sets we play in the class are usually in .csv format. Text mining focuses on 
unstructured text data, which come in words. How to convert text to numbers 
that still bear the meaning of text is an important topic in text mining. In text 
mining we will have to deal with some problems that do not exist in mining 
structured data, such as the subjectivity in annotations, for example, how to 
determine if a tweet is positive, negative, or neutral. Different people might give 
different assessments. 

●  Technology wise: The data mining class uses Weka and R. The text mining 

class uses a Python-based command line tool call scikit-learn. 

●  Challenge wise: Text mining requires even more critical thinking as it is 

research oriented. The students are usually a mix of doctoral and masters 
students from multiple disciplines, such as iSchool, linguistics, communications, 
business, political science, etc. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COURSE SYLLABUS 
IST 736 Text Mining 

2 

What is the difference between IST 736 Text Mining and IST 664 Natural 
Language Processing? 

NLP and TM do share some foundations. NLP focuses on deep analysis of language, 
such as POS tagging, sentence structure parsing, named-entity recognition, semantic role 
labeling, etc. Deep analysis can be highly informative and also time consuming. In 
contrast, text mining focuses on using machine learning and large amounts of data for fast 
predictions, usually on shallow features like just words. Depending on real-world 
applications, sometimes we need deep analysis if time is not a concern, sometimes we do 
fast and shallow analysis, and sometimes combine both. IST 664 is not a prerequisite for 
IST 736. 

Credits: 3 

Learning Objectives: 
After taking this course, the students will be able to: 

●  describe basic concepts and methods in text mining, for example document 

representation, information extraction, text classification and clustering, and topic 
modeling; 

●  use benchmark corpora, commercial and open-source text analysis and 

visualization tools to explore interesting patterns; 

●  understand conceptually the mechanism of advanced text mining algorithms for 

information extraction, text classification and clustering, opinion mining, and their 
applications in real-world problems; and 

●  choose appropriate technologies for specific text analysis tasks and evaluate 

the benefit and challenges of the chosen technical solution. 

Bibliography/Texts/Supplies—Required: 

•  Weiss, S. M., Indurkhya, N., & Zhang, T. (2010). Fundamentals of predictive text 

mining. New York: Springer. ISBN: 978-1849962254 

•  The instructor will also provide slides, tutorials, readings, sample data, and 

sample scripts. 

Bibliography/Texts/Supplies—Additional: 
The following books are not required. But, the instructor also consulted the following 
books to design this course. You are encouraged to explore these books.  

●  Manning, C. D., Raghavan, P., & Schutze, H. (2008). Introduction to 

information retrieval, Chapters 6 and 13–18, Cambridge University Press. 
Available online at: http://nlp.stanford.edu/IR-book/ 
●  Mitchell, T. (1990). Machine learning. McGraw-Hill. 
●  Severance, C. (2016). Python for everybody: Exploring data in Python 3. 

Online book: https://www.py4e.com/  

Software: 
All of the following tools are widely used open source toolkits for machine learning and 
text mining. Although they will be installed on lab computers, students should also install 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COURSE SYLLABUS 
IST 736 Text Mining 

3 

these packages on their own computers to be able to use them conveniently during the 
semester and in the future. 

The easiest way to install both scikit-learn and NLTK is to install the Anaconda 
package.  On iSchool lab machines, students can install Anaconda in their H drive. 

http://docs.continuum.io/anaconda/pkg-docs.html 

This package is large, containing 224 useful packages for all kinds of data analysis, 
including both scikit-learn and NLTK. The scikit-learn and NLTK websites provide 
comprehensive documentations and tutorials. 

scikit-learn: http://scikit-learn.org/stable/ 

NLTK: http://www.nltk.org/ Weka  
Weka: http://www.cs.waikato.ac.nz/ml/weka/ 

Mallet: http://mallet.cs.umass.edu/ 

Requirements: 

●  Communication: This course will use the 2SU LMS as the main  communication 
platform in and out of class time. Students are required to check  their accounts 
on a regular basis. Important announcements will be posted to the 
Announcement wall. Failure to read the class announcements  will not be 
considered a suitable excuse for not being informed. 

●  Class participation (15%): Class participation is important for this class. 
Students are required to attend classes and actively participate in class 
discussions and exercises. If a student missed a class for legitimate reasons, 
such as health problems and job interviews, the student should make up the 
exercises within a week without grade penalty.  
•  Participation grade  will be calculated at the end of the semester using the 

formula x/y*15, denoting y  as the total number of discussions/exercises, and 
x as the actual number the  student participated in.  

•  For each week, the exercise questions in the asynchronous content need to 
be answered 24 hours before that week’s live session, so that the instructor 
can review them and address any issues during the live session. For example, 
all exercises for Week 1 should be finished 24 hours before Live Session 1. 

●  Assignments (60%): Assignments must be professionally prepared and 

submitted  electronically. All assignments should be submitted in Word  files 
named as “HW_Num_Lastname_Firstname.doc(x),” e.g., 
“HW_1_Smith_John.doc.” No PDF files please. To ensure fast return, all 
assignments should be submitted on time.  
•  Each assignment accounts for 100 points. At the end of the semester, the 
total points from all assignments will be rescaled to 60% of the final score.  
•  Each assignment is due 48 hours before the next week’s live session, so that 
the instructor can grade and return them to students before they work on the 
next assignment. For example, HW1 is due 48 hours before Live Session 2. 

●  Final project (25%): Students will work on projects starting from Week 9. 
Checkpoints include project idea presentation (Week 9), project clinic 
(Week 10), and final  project report (one week after Week 10 live session). 

 
 
 
COURSE SYLLABUS 
IST 736 Text Mining 

4 

Students can use this week for final revisions based on feedback from 
professor and peer students. 

Grading: 

Grade 

Points 

Grade 
B+ 

A 
A– 

93–100  B 
B– 
90–92 

Points 
87–89 
83–86 
80–82 

Grade 
C+ 
C 
C– 

Points 
77–79 
73–76 
70–72 

Grades of D and D– may not be assigned to graduate students. 

Grade 
F 

Points 
0–69 

Tips for success in this class: curiosity, critical thinking, math, and programming. 
•  Curiosity: Curious about language and meaning, pay attention to the data details. Don't treat a data set 

as a blackbox. Don't treat an algorithm as a blackbox. Try see through them. 

•  Critical thinking: Text mining is essentially research. You will learn and practice methods to discover 

patterns, and also evaluate whether and why the discovered patterns are true and useful. 

•  Math: You will need some math knowledge, such as algebra and probability, to understand how the 

data mining algorithms work. 

•  Programming: Although GUI tools like Weka would allow users with no programming skills to play with 
data sets, data sets are rarely immediately ready for analysis in these tools. The results from off-the-
shelf tools may need additional transformation to see patterns. Python programming skills would help 
you pre- and post-processing text data. Programming would also help you gain more convenient 
control over algorithm tuning in your scripts. 

Academic Integrity Policy: 
Syracuse University’s Academic Integrity Policy reflects the high value that we, as a 
university community, place on honesty in academic work. The policy defines our 
expectations for academic honesty and holds students accountable for the integrity of all 
work they submit. Students should understand that it is their responsibility to learn about 
course-specific expectations, as well as about university-wide academic integrity 
expectations. The policy governs appropriate citation and use of sources, the integrity of 
work submitted in exams and assignments, and the veracity of signatures on 
attendance sheets and other verification of participation in class activities. The policy 
also prohibits students from submitting the same work in more than one class without 
receiving written authorization in advance from both instructors. Under the policy, 
students found in violation are subject to grade sanctions determined by the course 
instructor and non-grade sanctions determined by the School or College where the 
course is offered as described in the Violation and Sanction Classification Rubric. SU 
students are required to read an online summary of the University’s academic integrity 
expectations and provide an electronic signature agreeing to abide by them twice a year 
during pre-term check-in on MySlice. For more information about the policy, see 
http://academicintegrity.syr.edu. 

Disability-Related Accommodations: 
Syracuse University values diversity and inclusion; we are committed to a climate of 
mutual respect and full participation. If you believe that you need accommodations for a 
disability, please contact the Office of Disability Services (ODS), 
disabilityservices.syr.edu, located at 804 University Avenue, room 309, or call 
315.443.4498 for an appointment to discuss your needs and the process for requesting 
accommodations. ODS is responsible for coordinating disability-related 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COURSE SYLLABUS 
IST 736 Text Mining 

5 

accommodations and will issue “Accommodation Authorization Letters” to students as 
appropriate. Since accommodations may require early planning and generally are not 
provided retroactively, please contact ODS as soon as possible. Our goal at the 
iSchool is to create learning environments that are useable, equitable, inclusive and 
welcoming. If there are aspects of the instruction or design of this course that result in 
barriers to your inclusion or accurate assessment or achievement, please meet with me 
to discuss additional strategies beyond official accommodations that may be helpful to 
your success. 

Religious Observances Notification and Policy: 
SU’s religious observances policy, found at 
supolicies.syr.edu/emp_ben/religious_observance.htm , recognizes the diversity of 
faiths represented in the campus community and protects the rights of students, faculty, 
and staff to observe religious holy days according to their tradition. Under the policy, 
students should have an opportunity to make up any examination, study, or work 
requirements that may be missed due to a religious observance provided they notify 
their instructors no later than the end of the second week of classes through an online 
notification form in MySlice listed under Student Services/Enrollment/My Religious 
Observances/Add a Notification. 

Student Academic Work Policy: 
Student work prepared for University courses in any media may be used for educational 
purposes, if the course syllabus makes clear that such use may occur. You grant 
permission to have your work used in this manner by registering for, and by continuing 
to be enrolled in, courses where such use of student work is announced in the course 
syllabus. 

 
 
 
COURSE SYLLABUS 
IST 736 Text Mining 

Sample Schedule 

6 

Week  Topic 

Readings 
before class 

Items due 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

11 

Introduction to Text Mining 
Document Vectorization 

Corpus Analysis 

Ch. 1 
Ch. 2 

Ch. 2 

Naïve Bayes for Text Categorization  Ch. 3.1–3.4 

Text Classifier Evaluation and 
Human Annotation 

scikit-learn 
SVMs for Text 
Categorization 
Document Clustering and 
Topic Modeling 

Ch. 3.5 

Ch. 3.4 

Ch. 5 

HW1 

HW2 

HW3 

HW4 

HW5 
HW6 

HW7 

Literature Review on Text 
Mining  Applications/Project Idea 
Presentation 

New Topics in Text 
Mining/Project Clinic 
and Presentation 

HW8 
Student presentation 

Student presentation 

Final project report 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
