IST772 Materials – Copyright 2021 by Kevin Crowston & Jeffrey Stanton 
Please do not post online. 

IST 772 - (3 credits) 
Catalog Title: Quantitative Reasoning for Data Science  
Time/Day: Monday, 2:00–4:45 PM  
Location: TBD 

Instructor: Kevin Crowston 
Phone: +1 315–443–1676   Email: crowston@syr.edu 

Note that this syllabus is subject to change. 

Course Catalog Description: 

Multiple strategies for inferential reasoning about quantitative data. Methods for 
connecting data provenance to substantive analytical conclusions. 

Course summary and objectives: 

Quantitative data analysis stands at the center of the field of data science. Yet most people 
who make use of analytical results – and a surprising number who produce those results – 
have little idea of how the nature of the data and the analysis impacts their interpretation. 
Uncertainty is an intrinsic and inescapable characteristic of data. If we fail to understand 
uncertainty when working with our data, at best we will make poorer decisions than 
necessary and at worst we will make catastrophic errors based on mistaken assumptions. 
Statistical inference is the judgment process by which we make sense of uncertainty 
in data, and this course focuses on establishing a thoughtful and thorough 
understanding of statistical inference. 

This course will help you understand contemporary methods of statistical inference 
regardless of the specific type of analysis you are undertaking. The primary goal of this 
course is for you to learn the techniques and concepts that facilitate drawing sensible 
conclusions from samples of quantitative data. The course has three major goals focusing 
on knowledge, skills, and practice. By the end of this course you will be able to: 

Demonstrate knowledge of contemporary inferential statistical concepts (from the 
perspective of two contemporary philosophies) and data analysis strategies by making 
sensible choices about: 
•  How data collection, the data themselves, and the analysis processes relate to the kinds of 

inferences that can be drawn 

•  What kinds of analysis will be feasible and developing the skill of planning data collection 

and measurement to facilitate appropriate analysis 

Practice effective data science analytics: 
•  Preparing data for analysis, including screening data, dealing with missing data, doing 

data transformations 

•  Testing assumptions that data must meet for analyses and inferences to be reasonable 
•  Interpreting data analysis results and outputs and communicating them to others using 

language that accurately describes uncertainty 

1 

 
 
 
IST772 Materials – Copyright 2021 by Kevin Crowston & Jeffrey Stanton 
Please do not post online. 

•  Leaving a documentation/provenance trail for other analysts to follow and reproduce 

your work 

Demonstrate competence and/or mastery of the skills needed for use of a popular statistics 
and data management platform to conduct sound and reproducible analyses including: 
•  Installing R and R-studio, and creating readable code to conduct analyses 
•  Exploring the limitations of existing data sets and how their provenance influences what 

analyses to perform and what inferences to draw 

•  Choosing appropriate R procedures and configuring the relevant operational parameters 

Note for Students Who Have Taken SCM651 

This course covers several of the same statistical procedures as another course in the data 
science program, SCM651. It does so from a different perspective, however, and with 
distinctive goals. Both courses cover the basics of R, bivariate Pearson correlation, Analysis 
of Variance, Least Squares Multiple Regression, and Binomial Logistic Regression. The 
focus of this course is on the foundations of statistical inference with a special focus on the 
conceptual and procedural connections among traditional frequentist inference methods 
and Bayesian inference. This course focuses on the principles of correct interpretation 
of statistical evidence. Knowledge from this course can be applied to any new inferential 
technique that you encounter. Students who (will) have professional responsibilities that 
involve communicating about statistical results in writing, verbally, and graphically will 
sharpen those skills in this course. 

Textbook and Readings: 

One textbook is required for this course: Stanton (2017), Reasoning with Data: An 
Introduction to Traditional and Bayesian Statistics Using R (abbreviated below as RwD; 
ISBN-13: 978-1462530267; ISBN-10: 1462530265). The paperback version of this 
textbook is available from the bookstore. Paperback, hard back, and electronic versions are 
all available on Amazon and other online book sellers: 

https://www.amazon.com/Reasoning-Data-Introduction-Traditional-
Statistics/dp/1462530265 

There are four known errata in the textbook.  

1.  On page 18, the book states that the Poisson distribution is good for modeling 

arrival delays. In fact, the exponential distribution is better for modeling arrival 
delays, while the Poisson is better at modeling the number of arrival events within 
fixed time periods (note that a Poisson variable is always a natural number, i.e., a 
count).  

2.  On page 36 in Exercise 8, the reference to a previous exercise should be to Exercise 

7 rather than Exercise 6.  

3.  On page 224, the caption for Figure 10.5 is incorrect. It should read, “Boxplots of age 

and income variables, grouped by vote.”  

4.  On page 272, problem 2 refers to the Blackmore data set as being in the nlme 

package, while it is actually from the carData package. 

2 

 
 
 
IST772 Materials – Copyright 2021 by Kevin Crowston & Jeffrey Stanton 
Please do not post online. 

In addition to the textbook, I will also provide supplemental readings for you based on your 
interests and background. 

Note that we will use R and R-Studio extensively throughout this class. R-Studio is the 
preferred platform for developing code in this class. You must have access to a laptop 
computer on which these open source packages can be installed (they work on Mac, 
Windows, and Linux). Bring a laptop to each class with R and R-Studio ready to run. You 
will also find it advantageous to have R and R-Studio available when you are reading the 
textbook.  

Class Sessions (Note: Flipped Format) 

This class is a “flipped” class. The idea behind a flipped class is that, given the right content, 
you can prepare yourself quite extensively before we meet in person allowing the in-
person time to be spent on activities that benefit from interaction rather than lecture 
(defined as “a process by which the contents of professor’s notes are transferred to the 
student’s notebook without passing through the mind of either”).  

To prepare yourself for the in-person session each week, you must read the designated 
chapter in Reasoning with Data and then review the videos that are linked in Blackboard 
for the given week. Take notes while you read and watch and make note of points where 
you have questions. Each weekly set of videos ends with a brief, two question assessment 
meant to reinforce and solidify your understanding of the material for that week.  

The in-person session will meet once a week for 165 minutes. Rather than lecture, the class 
will generally consist of discussion of the materials you already reviewed and in-class 
exercises to reinforce your ability to apply what you’ve learned. Certain classes will include 
“low stakes” practice tests (that is, you get credit just for trying the work). Once your 
questions are cleared up and we’ve gone through the exercises, you will have the remaining 
class time to work on that week’s problem set or practice exam, while being able to ask 
questions or reopen discussion of unclear points, with the goal of submitting the 
assignment by the end of class or shortly after.  

During the class, you are expected actively participate by answering the instructor’s 
questions and interacting with your colleagues. Most sessions will include exercises where 
you will work with one or more colleagues on a problem assigned by the instructor. To be 
able to take part in these exercises, you must bring to class a laptop with Zoom and 
RStudio installed. All of the exercise materials needed for participation in the live session 
are stored in Blackboard. People learn best in an environment of mutual respect, so please 
remember that your colleagues in these exercises may be at a different stage of knowledge 
or skill than you. Be supportive and assist others with their learning during the class.  

In summary, in a traditional class, in-person time is spent on an introduction to content, 
leaving students to work out how to apply it on their own. In a flipped class, students 
introduce themselves to the material on their own time, and in-person time is spent 
practicing applying the knowledge, with support from the professor and other students. 
Done correctly, a flipped class is much more effective for student learning. However, it 

3 

 
 
 
IST772 Materials – Copyright 2021 by Kevin Crowston & Jeffrey Stanton 
Please do not post online. 

requires discipline on your part to prepare. If you have not done the required review 
before hand, you will get little out of the in-person session and will not be prepared to do 
the weekly assignment or the exams.  

Weekly Workflow 

The textbook, Reasoning with Data, serves as the main knowledge base for the class. Each 
week will be based upon one chapter of the book. We will go through the whole book in 
sequence from Chapter 1 to Chapter 12. Preparing for class by reading the book, running 
the R code examples, and taking notes is the major key to success in this course. Here is a 
recommended weekly workflow to help you stay on pace: 
•  At least three days prior to class, read the assigned chapter in Reasoning with Data. 
Each chapter runs about 15 pages and the whole book was designed to be highly 
readable and accessible, even to those with a limited background in math and/or 
limited prior statistical knowledge. Depending upon how quickly you read, each chapter 
should take you no more than about 90 minutes for a thorough consideration. You will 
find it advantageous to run the code examples shown in the chapters while you read. I 
have provided Jupyter notebooks to make this easy. Take written notes while you read!  
•  One or two days before class: Review all of the video lectures provided for that week. 
The lectures are provided in bite sized segments so that you can take notes and run 
code in between segments. After reviewing the last video in each week’s list, there is a 
two-question, short answer test on Blackboard for you to complete. Each of these is 
timed, limited to 60 minutes, and must be completed in one sitting. You may use your 
notes and the book as reference material. 

•  The class sessions occur once per week. Participation in class is obligatory: If you 

have a compelling reason to miss one class, make sure to inform me in advance. If your 
obligations or circumstances will cause you to miss more than one class you should take 
this course in a future semester. One necessity for your success in class includes 
bringing a laptop with the capability to run R-Studio and Zoom. Each in-class session 
will contain coding and interpretation activities based on the exercises at the end of 
each chapter. At the end of the class session you will be submitting the code file you 
developed as you worked on the exercises.  

•  Following the in-person session, you will have 72 hours to complete the homework 

assignment for that week (though as noted above, there will usually be time to work on 
these during the in-person session), i.e., the homework is due 5pm Friday. The 
homework assignment generally comprises problems drawn from the exercises at the 
conclusion of each chapter of Reasoning with Data. Most of the homework problems 
require the use of R-studio. If you tackle these problems immediately after the live 
session (or even during!) you should be able to complete each homework in somewhere 
between one and three hours. After the in-person session, you can ask me questions by 
email, but you must allow 24 hours for a response, so getting started early is 
paramount. 

4 

 
 
 
IST772 Materials – Copyright 2021 by Kevin Crowston & Jeffrey Stanton 
Please do not post online. 

Course Calendar: 

Week  Reading 
1 

Introduction & 
Chapter 1 

2 

3 

4 

Chapter 2 

Chapter 3 

Chapter 4 

5 

Chapter 5 

6 

Chapter 6 

7 

No Reading 

8 

Chapter 7 

9 

Chapter 8 

10 

Chapter 9 

Goals 
Topic: Getting started and Statistical Vocabulary 
Personal introductions; Get R and R-Studio Installed; Try R and R-
Studio; Initial learning and skills assessment; Read Appendix A and 
Appendix B if you are not yet an R user; 
Topic: Basic Probability; 
Explore descriptive statistics and distributions; View data sets in R; 
Contingency table exercise; read data into R and diagnose. 
Topic: Sampling Distributions; 
Principles of sampling; sampling over the long run; sampling 
distributions of means: generating sampling distributions. 
Topic: Statistical Inference Part I; 
Practice exam; Inductive reasoning, the logic of inference; 
comparing means of independent samples; point estimates and 
interval estimates; confidence intervals.  
Topic: Statistical Inference Part II; 
Practice exam; Bayesian thinking; Bayes’ rule; Markov chain, Monte 
Carlo; posterior distribution of mean differences; null hypothesis 
significance test.  
Topic: ANOVA & Experimental Groups; 
Analysis of variance; between and within groups variance; the F- 
distribution; Bayes factors; experimental data collection and 
analysis.  
Mid-term exam: The mid-term will occur in the classroom during 
class seven. The exam may ask you to use R to produce some 
results and/or to write up an interpretation of some provided 
results. The mid-term may also contain knowledge and skill 
questions. 
Topic: Measures of association; 
Association, covariance, and correlation; cross products and 
Pearson product moment, inferential reasoning about the 
correlation coefficient; categorical associations; correlation data 
collection and analysis; chi-square data collection and analysis. 
Topic: Multiple Regression/Linear Prediction; 
Criteria and predictors; point clouds; least-squares criterion; 
measures of model quality; multicollinearity; Bayesian and 
frequentist hypothesis testing.  
Topic: Interactions in ANOVA and Regression; 
Interactions in ANOVA; two-way experimental designs and more 
complex designs; degrees of freedom for ANOVA interactions; 
interpreting Bayesian output; interactions in multiple regression; 
centering; graphic interactions. 

5 

 
 
 
IST772 Materials – Copyright 2021 by Kevin Crowston & Jeffrey Stanton 
Please do not post online. 

11 

Chapter 10 

12 

Chapter 11 

13 

14 

Chapter 12 

No reading 

Student Assessment: 

Topic: Categorical Analysis; 
The logistic curve; generalized linear model and link functions; log 
odds and odds; measures of model quality; Bayesian estimation of 
logistic regression; in class categorical prediction exercise.  
Topic: Time Series Analysis; 
Non-independence of observations; repeated measures ANOVA; 
time-series analysis; change point analysis.  
Topic: Dealing with Too Many Variables; 
Principal component analysis; scale reliability.  
Review session. Come prepared with questions or topics you’d 
like to discuss as you prepare for the final exam.  

This course provides knowledge and practice in quantitative data analysis and in 
communicating statistical results accurately and without bias. Note that the primary goal of 
these assessments is to enhance your learning. If you work hard, jump in with both feet, 
and do all of the assigned work, it will be a success, and I can assure you that you will 
obtain a fair result at the end. Here is the breakdown of points for the course: 

11 homework assignments, 5 points each, with lowest score dropped = 50 points 
5 practice tests, 2 points each = 10 points (weeks 4, 5, 8, 9, and 10) 
1 midterm based on the first 5 weeks of the course = 15 points 
1 final exam comprising an analysis of real data sets = 25 points 

And the grading table: 

A = 95-100; A- = 90-94.99; B+ = 85-89.99; B = 80-84.99; B- = 75-79.99, C+ = 70-74.99; C = 
65-69.99; C- = 60-64.99; >60 = F 

Keep in mind these important grading rules: I will not round-up your final points count 
to the next highest integer; there will not be any extra credit assignments; if you submit 
late, it will only be accepted and graded at my discretion and a late penalty will be applied. I 
will not offer any make up exams – so you must be present on exam days. My evaluations of 
your work are based on nearly three decades of grading statistics homework and exams: I 
will always be happy to fix any bookkeeping errors that may occur, but my judgments on 
the correctness of your work are final. 

Preparing Your Homework for Submission 

Prepare your responses to the assigned questions in the provided RStudio notebook, then 
knit the notebook to create a PDF to submit. Double check that the PDF correctly captures 
the work you did. Submit your homework as a PDF file. Name your file HWX_Lastname.pdf, 
substituting the week number and your own last name.  

6 

 
 
 
IST772 Materials – Copyright 2021 by Kevin Crowston & Jeffrey Stanton 
Please do not post online. 

The homework intentionally models the kinds of actions and language you may use as a 
data scientist, so it is critical to format and present the homework in a professional 
manner. Likewise, a key goal of this course pertains to accurate and unbiased 
communication of statistical results: Please write your interpretations in complete, 
grammatical sentences.  

The main purpose of the homework is to practice the skills you have learned that week and 
crystallize the knowledge that you have gained. As such, homework should be a solo 
activity, so that you can prove to yourself and the instructor your capacity to accomplish 
the work independently. To the extent that you do collaborate with someone else – 
including seeking coaching, feedback, suggestions, or code examples – you must 
acknowledge your sources at the top of the homework file. This is the “give credit where 
credit is due” principle and it is paramount for data scientists. The same idea holds with 
respect to consulting outside resources, such as the R-Bloggers website. This point is 
important enough to repeat: Do not cut and paste anything without proper citation and 
quotation marks! Based on these principles, your homework should begin with a statement 
like one of these: 

•  Homework 1 by Fred Flintstone: I produced the material below with no assistance. 
or 
•  Homework 1 by Fred Flintstone: I consulted with Barney Rubble about how to tackle 

these problems, but we each wrote our code and text independently. 

or 
•  Homework 1 by Fred Flintstone: I consulted StackOverflow.com for information about 

how to write this code. Line 43-45 of this code file were copied from 
https://stackoverflow.com/questions/bayesian-inference-in-R 

Any variation on these statements is reasonable as long as it is forthright. If you submit a 
homework that reports collaboration with another student, your instructor may have new 
advice, guidance, or suggestions for you to enhance your learning.  

Solutions for the problem sets will not be posted. However, each student will once in the 
semester prepare and post a video explaining how they answered one or two of the 
problems, which can be consulted as a reference.  

Examinations 

A midterm exam will be given in class in class 7.  

For the final exam, you will receive a custom dataset for the final exam that is unique to 
you. You will undertake a set of analyses described in the exam document, saving (and 
submitting to Blackboard) all of your output for later use and then create and submit to 
Blackboard a written report of your results prior to a deadline during the final exam 
period.  

7 

 
 
 
IST772 Materials – Copyright 2021 by Kevin Crowston & Jeffrey Stanton 
Please do not post online. 

iSchool Values 

The leadership, faculty and staff of the iSchool endorse the following values: 
•  Excellence 
•  Discovery & Innovation 
• 
•  Diversity & Inclusion 
•  Global Citizenship & Engagement 

Integrity 

Be Well 

Mental health and overall well-being are significant predictors of academic success.  As 
such it is essential that during your university experience you develop the skills and 
resources effectively to navigate stress, anxiety, depression, and other mental health 
concerns. Please familiarize yourself with the range of resources the Barnes Center 
provides (https://ese.syr.edu/bewell/) and seek out support for mental health concerns as 
needed. Counseling services are available 24/7, 365 days, at +1 315-443-8000. 

Academic Integrity 

The Academic Integrity Policy holds students accountable for the integrity of the work they 
submit. Students should be familiar with the university’s policy and know that it is their 
responsibility to learn about course-specific expectations, as well as about university 
policy. The university policy governs appropriate citation and use of sources, the integrity 
of work submitted in exams and assignments, and the veracity of signatures on attendance 
sheets and other verification of participation in class activities. The policy also prohibits 
students from submitting the same written work in more than one class without receiving 
written authorization in advance from both instructors. 

All academic integrity expectations that apply to in-person quizzes and exams also apply to 
online quizzes and exams. In this course, all work submitted for quizzes and exams must be 
yours alone. Discussing quiz or exam questions with anyone during the quiz or exam 
period violates academic integrity expectations for this course. Using websites that charge 
fees or require uploading of course material (e.g., Chegg, Course Hero) to obtain exam 
solutions or assignments completed by others and present the work as your own violates 
academic integrity expectations in this course. 

As a supplemental matter closely related to academic integrity, all materials produced for 
this class are copyrighted, either by the course originator, Jeffrey Stanton, by your section 
instructor, or by Syracuse University. Recordings of class sessions are the intellectual 
property of the course instructor. You may download these materials for your use in this 
class. However, you may not provide these materials to other parties (e.g., web sites, social 
media, other students) without permission. Doing so is a violation of intellectual property 
law and of the student code of conduct. Please respect the integrity of the course. Do not 
post materials from this course online. Do not post answers to homework questions or 
otherwise share your answers with other students. Similarly, do not post answers to exam 
questions or otherwise share your answers with other students. 

8 

 
 
 
IST772 Materials – Copyright 2021 by Kevin Crowston & Jeffrey Stanton 
Please do not post online. 

Disability-Related Accommodations 

Our community values diversity and seeks to promote meaningful access to educational 
opportunities for all students. I am committed to your success and to supporting Section 
504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 as amended and the Americans with Disabilities Act 
(1990). This means that in general no individual who is otherwise qualified shall be 
excluded from participation in, be denied benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination 
under any program or activity, solely by reason of having a disability. You are also welcome 
to contact me privately to discuss your academic needs. Syracuse University has policies, 
procedures, and a resource center to assist with disability related matters. 

Discrimination or Harassment 

Federal and state law, and University policy prohibit discrimination and harassment based 
on sex or gender (including sexual harassment, sexual assault, domestic/dating violence, 
stalking, sexual exploitation, and retaliation). If a student has been harassed or assaulted, 
they can obtain confidential counseling support, 24-hours a day, 7 days a week, from the 
Sexual and Relationship Violence Response Team at the Counseling Center (315-443-8000, 
Barnes Center at The Arch, 150 Sims Drive, Syracuse, New York 13244). Incidents of sexual 
violence or harassment can be reported non-confidentially to the University’s Title IX 
Officer (Sheila Johnson Willis, 315-443-0211, titleix@syr.edu, 005 Steele Hall). Reports to 
law enforcement can be made to the University’s Department of Public Safety (315-443-
2224, 005 Sims Hall), the Syracuse Police Department (511 South State Street, Syracuse, 
New York, 911 in case of emergency or 315-435-3016 to speak with the Abused Persons 
Unit), or the State Police (844-845-7269). I will seek to keep information you share with 
me private to the greatest extent possible, but as a professor I have mandatory reporting 
responsibilities to share information regarding sexual misconduct, harassment, and crimes 
I learn about with the University’s Title IX Officer to help make our campus a safer place for 
all. 

Faith Tradition Observances 

Syracuse University’s Religious Observances Policy recognizes the diversity of faiths 
represented in the campus community and protects the rights of students, faculty, and staff 
to observe religious holy days according to their traditions. Under the policy, students are 
given an opportunity to make up any examination, study, or work requirements that may 
be missed due to a religious observance, provided they notify their instructors no later 
than the academic drop deadline. For observances occurring before the drop deadline, 
notification is required at least two academic days in advance. Students may enter their 
observances in MySlice under Student Services/Enrollment/My Religious 
Observances/Add a Notification. 

9 

 
 
 
