IST659 Data Administration Concepts and Database 
Management 
Syracuse University Graduate Course Syllabus 

Fall 2021 Sections Meeting Times 

M001 Mondays:  9:30 AM – 12:15 PM Link Hall 105 

Course Information 
Instructor 
Michael Fudge 
Professor of Practice 
314 Hinds Hall 
mafudge@syr.edu 
https://ischool.syr.edu/people/directories/view/mafudge/ 
Office Hours: On Microsoft Teams, 12-2pm Thursdays. 

Description 

Definition, development, and management of databases for information systems. Data analysis techniques, 
data modeling, and schema design. Query languages and search specifications. Overview of file organization 
for databases. Data administration concepts and skills. 

Additional Course Description 
This is an introductory course in database management systems. It examines data structures, file 
organizations, concepts, and principles of database management systems (DBMS); as well as, data analysis, 
database design, data modeling, database management and database implementation. More specifically, it 
introduces hierarchical, network and relational data models; entity-relationship modeling; basics of 
Structured Query Language (SQL); data normalization; and database design. This course provides hands-on 
experience in database design and implementation through assignments, lab exercises and course projects. 
This course also introduces advanced database concepts such as transaction management and concurrency 
control, distributed databases, multi-tier client/server architectures, database applications, improving query 
performance through indexing, and advanced data query patterns for extract-transform-load. 
Prerequisite / Co-requisite:  None 
Audience:  This is an introductory course and required no prior knowledge in the subject area. 
Credits:  3 
Learning Objectives 
Upon completing this course, the learner should be able to: 

•  Describe fundamental data and database concepts including various storage models. 
• 
•  Analyze business problems and design and implement appropriate data-oriented solutions using the 

Explain and use the database development lifecycle and data models. 

• 
• 

relational data storage model. 
Solve problems by constructing database objects and queries using the SQL language. 
Identify performance and data integrity improvements of existing database designs and 
implementations. 

IST659 

Campus Syllabus - v2023.11.11  

Page 1/8 

 
 
 
 
Evaluate and select approaches for data migrations, temporal data, and data normalization. 

• 
•  Critique the effectiveness of DBMS in computer information systems. 

Course Fees and/or Costs 

•  None 

Required Textbooks and Supplies 

•  Applied Database Management, By Michael Fudge. ISBN 9781644965900. The book is an online text 

• 

available within Blackboard. You will take quizzes through the textbook. 
Students are expected to have a laptop computer to participate in the class sessions, run the lab 
software, and complete the problem sets. Requirements are any Mac OSX, Windows 10, or 
Chromebook with 8GB RAM and 8GB free disk space. 

Understanding the Approach Used in This Course 
To instill good habits and routine, the approach used in this course is the same each week. It is designed to 
allow you to progress as a learner, ask questions, and grow comfortable with the material throughout the 
week. There are three phases to the approach: 

•  Coursework Before Class consists of a chapter reading from the textbook and a video lecture. Both 
are active learning tools, and you will be asked questions as you read and watch. Your responses are 
not graded but will be reviewed by your instructor to prepare for the in-class session. As part of your 
engagement with the learning process, it is expected you will review your own answers and prepare 
any questions or doubts you have about the coursework. Your learning outcomes at this stage are to 
recall key terms and understand the concepts presented to you. 
The In-Class session allows you to reinforce what you have learned and to begin to apply it to new 
problems and situations. We begin each class with students posting their coursework questions to 
the community board. Your questions should be based on concepts that remain unclear to you. 
These questions will guide out class discussions and activities. We then review the previous week’ 
homework / problem sets, discussing strategies and sharing answers to them. 

• 

•  After Class you will complete a lab and problem set. The lab contains a walk-through to guide you 

through the application of the problem-solving approaches relevant to this week’s material. The 
problem set is your opportunity to self-measure your knowledge of the material and application of it 
to new situations and scenarios. Included with your problem set is a metacognitive activity where 
you are asked to reflection upon your experiences as a learner that week and asses your comfort 
level with the material. 

Tools we will use in this Course 
It is suggested that you install and configure these tools on your laptop before the course begins. 

•  Microsoft Teams. Teams is collaboration tool. Integrating with email and calendaring Teams offers 

presence awareness and chat / messaging. These chats can be elevated into a video conference. We 
will use teams for class discussions, homework questions and office hours. You are welcome to 
contact me whenever my status says I am available. Your Office 365 account is linked to your NetID. 
Logon to teams by visiting https://portal.office.com entering your SU email netid@syr.edu  and then 
your NetID password. One you are signed into Office 365, click the Teams icon. 

•  Google Docs. We will use Google Docs as a collaborative note-taking tool to work in class on 
problems and breakout activities. Login with your SU Google account https://g.syr.edu. 

IST659 

Campus Syllabus - v2023.11.11  

Page 2/8 

 
 
•  Docker. Docker is a containerization platform, allowing you to run applications in isolation from your 
host computer. In this course we use it to run the DBMS itself and their supporting tools. You can 
download and install docker by following the instructions here: https://docs.docker.com/get-docker/ 

•  Azure Data Studio. Azure Data studio (ADS) is a SQL Database client. While you can get away with 

• 

using the web tools provided with the learn-databases setup, the ADS experience is better. To install, 
follow the instructions here: https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/sql/azure-data-studio/download-
azure-data-studio  
Learn Databases. Learn Databases is a suite of docker containers which create a database lab 
environment on your computer. There are containers for the SQL Server database management 
system itself, and 3 web tools for provisioning sample databases, database administration and 
writing SQL scripts. After you have installed Docker, follow the instructions at 
https://github.com/mafudge/learn-databases#walkthrough to set it up. Do not create any sample 
databases at this time – you will do this as part of the first problem set. 

Academic Expectations 
Requirements 
As an enrolled student in this course, it is expected that you will: 

1.  Be  Prepared.  It  is  expected  you  will  complete  the  assigned  readings  and  video  coursework  as 

prescribed.  

o  Participation in the assigned reading and video coursework is required and will be measured.  
o  Attendance of online or face-to-face sessions are required and there are no excused absences 

other than medical illness documented by the university.  

o  While in attendance you are expected to be engaged, an active participant in class.  You should 

o 

o 

be prepared to and an answer questions to the best of your ability when called upon. 
If you are participating virtually it is expected you will have your microphone muted until you 
need to speak and your video camera on. 
In  some  classes  an  ungraded  pop-quiz  or  other  type  of  diagnostic  instrument  will  measure 
your comprehension of coursework and passing will count as your participation grade for that 
week. 

o  Attendance  does  not  count  towards  your  grade,  but  excessive  absence  or  unpreparedness 
(more  than  10%  of  the  course)  will  decrease  your  final  grade  by  one  Registrar  Grade. (For 
example, A to A-) You will be warned before this happens. 

2.  Complete 12 Homework Problem Sets. These problem sets are technical activities which enforce key 
concepts learned in the lesson through problem-solving and practice.  They must be completed and 
turned in to Blackboard by the due date, which is the evening prior to our class session. It is important 
to remember that the homework is practice, if you do not have the right answer, it is expected you 
will have questions. You are expected to reflect on your learning. Each Problem Set is assigned a grade 
of: 

o  High  Pass  (10  points)  the  assignment  is  complete  and  correct  with  very  minor  errors,  and 
student contributes to homework discussion in class and a reflection on your learning for that 
week.  

o  Pass  (7  points)  the  assignment  is  complete  and  mostly  correct,  or  student  has  little  to  no 
contributions to homework discussions in class, or little to no reflection on your learning for 
the week.  

o  Needs Improvement (3 point) the assignment is incomplete or has several errors or is late, no 

reflection. 

o  Fail (0 points) the assignment was not turned in after 1 week. 

IST659 

Campus Syllabus - v2023.11.11  

Page 3/8 

 
3.  Take 12 Quizzes. The intention of the quiz is to ensure you are keeping pace with the coursework and 
to measure your understanding of the class material. Quizzes are issued in the online textbook.   

o  You will get one attempt at the quiz and your attempt must be complete on or before the 

date posted on the syllabus.  

o  Quizzes are open book.  
o  Quizzes consist of multiple choice and/or short answer questions. 
o  Quizzes individual effort. 
o  You must complete the quiz on your own time, outside of class. 
o  Due dates are posted on the syllabus. 

4.  Complete a Group Project, which demonstrates your ability to work in a team to design and implement 
a functional system with a database, based on what you have learned in the course.  Guidelines: 

o  Work in self-assembled teams of 2-3 students.  
o  Devise your own database to design and implement. Project idea must be pre-approved prior 

to beginning work.  

Required artifacts for submission 

1.  Document with team name, group members and which project you will work on. If your own 

a requirements document must be submitted and approved. 

Identification of your external data model and data logic. 

2.  Data analysis of the facts listing entities, attributes, and relationships in the data model. 
3.  Conceptual Data Model Diagram 
4.  Logical Data Model Diagram 
5. 
6.  Basic layout of all application screens 
7.  Diagram of each screen used in the application. 
8.  SQL Up/Down script to implement the internal model with initial data. 
9.  SQL Up/Down Script to load / migrate in existing data. 
10.  SQL Up/Down script of data logic for the external data model 
11.  Implementation of the application itself. 
12.  A team log recording individual and group contributions to the project including when and by 

whom. 

13.  A slide deck of your presentation 
14.  A Video recording of your team presentation 
15.  A Video reflection of what you learned from the experience what you would do better if you 

had the time, etc.  

Grading: 

Type of Activity 

Quantity 

Points 

Notes 

1.  Problem Sets 
2.  Quizzes 
3.  Team Project 

 Total Points 

Grading Scale: 

12 
12 
1 

10 
10 
60 

12 Total. Can be handed in late for a 3. 
12 Total. Issued through textbook. 
Refer to project document for details. 

Total  

120 
120 
  60 
300 

Student Achievement 

Percentage 

Grade Points 

Registrar Grade 

Mastery 

Satisfactory 

285 - 300 
270 - 284 
255 - 269 

4.0 
3.667 
3.333 

A 
A - 
B + 

IST659 

Campus Syllabus - v2023.11.11  

Page 4/8 

 
 
 
 
 
Student Achievement 

Percentage 

Grade Points 

Registrar Grade 

Low Passing 

Unsatisfactory 

Course Calendar 
Course Schedule  
Week  Dates 

225 - 254 
210 - 224 
195 - 209 
180 - 194 
165 - 179 
0 - 164 

3.0 
2.667 
2.333 
2.0 
1.667 
0 

B 
B - 
C + 
C 
C - 
F 

Topic for That Week 

What is Due? 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

9 

10 

11 

12 

13 

14 

15 

16 

17 

8/29 – 9/4 

Unit 1 – Introduction to Databases 

9/5 – 9/11 

No Classes – Labor Day 

9/12 – 9/18 

Unit 2 – The Relational Model 

9/19 – 9/25 

Unit 3 – Introduction to SQL 

9/26 – 10/2 

Unit 4 – SQL Select Part I 

10/3 – 10/9 

Unit 5 – SQL Select Part 2 

Problem Set 1, Quiz 1 (9/13) 

Problem Set 2, Quiz 2 (9/20) 

Problem Set 3, Quiz 3 (9/27) 

Problem Set 4, Quiz 4 (10/4) 

10/10 – 10/16  Unit 6 – SQL Advanced Patterns 

Problem Set 5, Quiz 5 (10/11) 

10/17 – 10/23  Unit 7 – Conceptual Data Modeling 

Problem Set 6, Quiz 6 (10/18) 

10/24 – 10/30  Unit 8 – Logical Data Modeling 

Problem Set 7, Quiz 7 (10/25) 

10/31 – 11/6 

Unit 9 – Database Applications  

Problem Set 8, Quiz 8 (11/1) 

11/7 – 11/13 

Unit 10 - Database Programming 

Problem Set 9, Quiz 9 (11/8)  

11/14 – 11/20  Unit 11 – Transactions and Concurrency Control 

Problem Set 10, Quiz 10 (11/15) 

11/21 – 11/27  No Classes – Thanksgiving Break 

11/28 – 12/4 

Unit 12 – Performance and Indexing  

Problem Set 11, Quiz 11 (11/29) 

12/5 – 12/10 

Unit 13 – Data Normalization  

Problem Set 12, Quiz 12 (12/6) 

12/11 – 12/16 

Final Project Presentations and Demos,  
online via appointment 

Team Project (12/16) 

PLEASE NOTE: Assigned readings and specific due dates for quizzes and problem sets posted to Blackboard. 

University Policies 
Academic Integrity Policy 
Syracuse University’s academic integrity policy reflects the high value that we, as a university community, 
place on honesty in academic work. The policy in effect at the School of Information Studies defines our 
expectations for academic honesty and holds students accountable for the integrity of all work they submit. 
Students should understand that it is their responsibility to learn about course-specific expectations, as well 
as about university-wide academic integrity expectations. The pilot policy governs appropriate citation and 
use of sources, the integrity of work submitted in exams and assignments, and the veracity of signatures on 
attendance sheets and other verification of participation in class activities. The pilot policy also prohibits 

IST659 

Campus Syllabus - v2023.11.11  

Page 5/8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
students from submitting the same work in more than one class without receiving written authorization in 
advance from both instructors. Under the pilot policy, students found in violation are subject to grade 
sanctions determined by the course instructor and non-grade sanctions determined by the School or College 
where the course is offered. SU students are required to read an online summary of the university’s academic 
integrity expectations and provide an electronic signature agreeing to abide by them twice a year during pre-
term check-in on MySlice. For more information and on the policy, see http://academicintegrity.syr.edu. 

Disability-Related Accommodations 
Syracuse University values diversity and inclusion; we are committed to a climate of mutual respect and full 
participation. If you believe that you need accommodations for a disability, please contact the Office of 
Disability Services (ODS), disabilityservices.syr.edu, located at 804 University Avenue, room 309, or call 
315.443.4498 for an appointment to discuss your needs and the process for requesting accommodations. 
ODS is responsible for coordinating disability-related accommodations and will issue “Accommodation 
Authorization Letters” to students as appropriate. Since accommodations may require early planning and 
generally are not provided retroactively, please contact ODS as soon as possible.  Our goal at the iSchool is to 
create learning environments that are useable, equitable, inclusive and welcoming. If there are aspects of the 
instruction or design of this course that result in barriers to your inclusion or accurate assessment or 
achievement, please meet with me to discuss additional strategies beyond official accommodations that may 
be helpful to your success. 

Religious Observances Notification and Policy 
SU’s religious observances policy, found at supolicies.syr.edu/emp_ben/religious_observance.htm , 
recognizes the diversity of faiths represented in the campus community and protects the rights of students, 
faculty, and staff to observe religious holy days according to their tradition. Under the policy, students should 
have an opportunity to make up any examination, study, or work requirements that may be missed due to a 
religious observance provided they notify their instructors no later than the end of the second week of 
classes through an online notification form in MySlice listed under Student Services/Enrollment/My 
Religious Observances/Add a Notification.   

Student Academic Work Policy 
Student work prepared for University courses in any media may be used for educational purposes, if the 
course syllabus makes clear that such use may occur. You grant permission to have your work used in this 
manner by registering for, and by continuing to be enrolled in, courses where such use of student work is 
announced in the course syllabus.  

I may use academic work that you complete this semester in subsequent semesters for educational purposes. 
Before using your work for that purpose, I will either get your written permission or render the work 
anonymous by removing all your personal identification. 

Course Evaluations 
There will be an end of course evaluation for you to complete this term, described below.  This evaluation 
will be conducted online and is entirely anonymous. You will receive a notification from the Syracuse 
University Office of Institutional Research & Assessment (OIRA) department in your email account with the 
evaluation website link and your passcode. 

We faculty work hard to do the best possible job when preparing and delivering courses for our students. 
Please understand that not only does the school use the course evaluations to make decisions about the 
curriculum in order to improve where necessary, but they also use them to make decisions about faculty 
members. Please take the time and fill out this evaluation as your feedback and support of this assessment 
effort is very much appreciated. 

IST659 

Campus Syllabus - v2023.11.11  

Page 6/8 

 
 
 
 
Other Course Policies 

•  All  work  is  due  on  the  dates  provided.  No  late  work  is  accepted.  The  reasoning  is  the  grading  is 

• 
• 

participation / effort-based and most of the content time-sensitive.  
Final grades will not be rounded up. 94/100 is an A-, please don’t ask. 
I take academic integrity seriously, and so should you. Cheating on quizzes or copying homework will 
result is an F in the course. Do not work together unless the assignment instructions state explicitly. 

IST659 

Campus Syllabus - v2023.11.11  

Page 7/8 

 
 
 
Office Hours 
You are welcome to stop by during office hours without an appointment. Should you need to make an 
appointment to see me outside of office hours, you must request via email and include the following:  

• 
State your reason for the appointment. 
• 
Include 3 times in which you can meet.  
•  Make sure 2 times are on different days. 

I will respond to you within 24 hours.  

Group Work 
The only group work permitted in this course is the Group Project. All other gradable work in this course 
should be considered individual effort. It is assumed that each of you know the difference between simply 
discussing work with your classmates and working collaboratively. When in doubt, ask.  

IST659 

Campus Syllabus - v2023.11.11  

Page 8/8 

 
 
 
